First Hop Redundancy Protocol
	Summary
		Host to next ip address (i.e. router gateway) is the first hop
		If the first hop goes down (i.e. router), the hosts that use that router will go offline.
		FHRP allows hosts to switch to another router quickly so that they remain online.
	Protocols
		HSRP
			Active routers and standby routers.
			Often, devices involved in HSRP deployment are L3 switches, not pure routers.
			However, the theory and commands are the same as on a router.
			1. Routers are placed into a router group
			2. One of the routers in the group is selected as the active router and another is chosen as the standby router
			IP and MAC addresses of physical routers in the group are unknown to downstream devices i.e. hosts
			The hosts communicates through a virtual router that have a MAC and IP address of its own.

Point 2 Point WANs
	WANs can be connected using a DTE/DCE cable.
		DCE cable needs to supply a clock rate to DTE side
	
	Encapsulation Protocols
		Encapsulation must match on both ends else PTP link will be physically up and logically down.
		HDLC
			Multiprotocol support (cHDLC)
		PPP
			Authentication via Password Authentication Protocol and Challenge Handshake Authentication protocol
				You can have one router authenticate another only. Two way authentication need not be set.
			Support for error detection and error recovery features
			Multiprotocol support
			Commands
				encap ppp
	Commands
		show controller serial x
			Check for DTE, DCE

Router on a stick
	In the past, L2 switch had to connect to L3 routers to do cross VLAN communication.
	Nowadays, the L3 routers functionality are added to L2 switches to allow for the same behavior
		Commands
			int vlan (vlan number) >> ip address (ip address as a gateway) (subnet mask)
	E.g. Two vlans on a switch.
		The vlans cannot communicate to each other.
		A route need to be constructed.
		This can be done by connecting a switch to a router by building a trunk.
		The host talks to the switch which talks to the router which constructs a route back to the destination.
		E.g. Switch interface to router is a trunk and router interface to switch is FA0/0
		Router can configure subinterfaces on FA0/0 > FA0/0/10 for VLAN10 & FA/0/0/20 for VLAN20
			IP addresses must be configured to each subinterfaces and tagged to respective VLAN.
			Commands
				int (interface x.vlanNumber(organization purpose) e.g. fast 0/0.1) >> encapsulation dot1q (vlan id e.g. 1)
Quality of Service
	QoS is about deciding which traffic is more important than other traffic and taking the actions to queue, transmit and handle said traffic.
	Traffic by default is using FIFO, no priority is configured.
		FIFO could be a problem if a long traffic flow is formed, where only one particular traffic is sucking up the queue.
	Flow-based WFQ
		This protocol pushes low bandwidth conversation to the front so that they can be completed while high bandwidth conversations are pushed into the background.
		*Running encryption or tunneling will interfere with WFQ.
		Low Latency Queueing
			LLQ is an "add-on" to CBWFQ that creates a strict priority queue for delay sensitive traffic (mostly voice traffic).
		Round Robin Queueing
			RRQ make sure that no single queue gets too much attention.
			Each queue is given attention in a round robin format.
		Weighted Round Robin Queueing
			WRRQ allows for priority to certain queues by assigning weight to each queue. Those weights are used to determine the amount of bandwidth assigned to each queue.
		Deficit Weight Round Robin Queueing
			When a queue goes over its transmission limit, the bandwidth is deducted from its max transmission in the next cycle
		Distributed WFQ
		Class-based WFQ
		Distributed class-based WFQ
		Queuing Problems
			Tail Drop
				Some packets will be dropped as they cannot fit into the queue.
			TCP Synchronization
				When packets are dropped, the sending device will slow its transmission rate.
				When the congestion lessens, the sender then increases its transmission rate which results in network congestions again.
				This results in the sender always sending too little or too much traffic. The transmission speed is never "just right"
				Solution:
					Random Early Detection
						RED will proactively drop packets before the queue gets full, though which packets get dropped is random
					Weight Random Early Detection
						WRED uses the packet's IP Precedence (IP Prec) or Differentiated Services Code Point (DSCP) to make a decision on which packets to drop.

Simple Network Management Protocol
	SNMP is used to carry network management info from one network device to another.
	In a SNMP context, the agents are considered the servers while the Managers are considered the clients
	SNMP Manager
		Monitoring software, typically installed on a server called a Network Management Station
		SNMP poll agents over UDP port 161 and these messages are GETs and SETs.

		There are several different GETs, with the most common being GET Request and GET Response.
		SNMP manager does a GET Request to agents and receives a GET Reply back.

		A SET is a request from the manager to the agent, request that certain variable be set.

		One problem is polling agents too often can suck up bandwidth.
		To solve this problem, SNMP Traps can be set which allows agents to send messages when critical events happen only.
		SNMP Informs are similar to Traps but require ACKs from the manager
	SNMP Agent
		Software installed on the devices being monitored
	Management Information Base
		The database on the agent that contains variables regarding the Agent
	SNMP Versions
		Community string is used as a user account that allows access to a router or other devices statistics.
		1
			Version 1 users are assigned to 1 of 2 communities, a read-only or read-write community.
			A clear-text community string (combination of the password and authority level) is transmitted which is a security flaw.
		2c
			v2 used the same clear-text community string concept.
			SNMP Informs were first made available on v2.
		3
			v3 brought authentication and encryption options.
			v3 password is hashed.
	Commands
		snmp-server community (access list) (ro/rw [readonly/readwrite]) (access list)
		snmp-server group (groupname) (SNMP version) (authentication method)
			authentication and privacy
		snmp-server user (username) (groupname) (SNMP version) (authentication method) (encryption algo) (authentication password for user)
SLA
	Service Level Agreement
		An agreement from providers to provide a level of service.
		Can involve things like packet loss to levels of jitter to Ethernet issues to smooth round-trip time.
		Source and responder
			Controlling stage
				Source sends control packets to the responder via UDP to create a control connection, an agreement on the rules of communication.
				If the responder agrees, it will send a message back to the source to create a control connection.
			Probing stage
				Before the packets are echoed back the source, the responder timestamps the packets.
				Once the source receives the timestamped replies, it knows it can communicate with the responder along with knowing certain metrics i.e. trip time
		Commands
			show ip sla
			ip sla (entry number) >>
	Commited Information Rate
		The CIR is a guarantee given to the customer by the service provider where the provider guarantees a "X" amount of bandwidth.
SPAN
	A network analyzer (sniffer) can be connected to a switch port.
	There is a need to configure the switch to copy traffic to that port while taking not to copy too much traffic.
	There is also an option of copying traffic sent to the host, sent by the host or both. "Both" is the default.
	SPAN allows us to define traffic that should be copied from a source to a destination port.
	Commands
		show monitor
		monitor session (SPAN session number) source int (interface range)
		monitor session (SPAN session number) destination int (interface range)
AAA
	Authentication, authorization and accounting
		Accounting
			Used to track network resource utilized by authenticated user.
	AAA can be enabled by:
		1. aaa new-model
		2. Configure location of TACACS+ or RADIUS server
		3. Configure a shared encryption key that is shared between client and server.
	A self contained AAA deployment is one whereby there is no external devices involved.
	AAA protocols
		TACACS+
			Cisco-proprietary TCP-based protocol
			Encrypts entire packet
			Runs each "A" separately
		RADIUS
			UDP-based protocol
			Encrypts only the password in the initial client-server packet
			Combines authentication and authorization processes.
			Cannot control authorization level of users
	Commands
		aaa new-model
		[require aaa new-model]tacacs server (name)
			>>
				key 7 (key)
				address ipv4 (tacacs server ip address)
		radius server (server name)
			>>
				key (key)
				address ipv4 (radius server ip address)
		aaa authentication login default group (radius/tacacs+) group (radius/tacacs+)
			Use servers for authentication for logins
			Can configure backup methods on the same line (up to 4)
				none method can be put in to allow login without authentication
		line vty 0 15 >> login authentication default
			Apply AAA authentication to telnet
		aaa authorization (type of authorization to allow)