VTP (VLAN Trunking Protocol)
	Let devices have a synced view of VLANs in the network.
	When one switch joins a VTP domain, it advertises a VTP Ad to other switches. If those switches doesn't belong to a domain already, it will join that domain.
	VTP Modes
		Restrict switches in a VTP domain to certain functions according to its mode.
		You can add ports to a VLAN on all the modes.
		You must have a switch in VTP domain running server mode.
		Server mode
			A switch in server mode can create, delete and modify VLANs.
		Client mode
			Cannot do anything that server mode can do.
		Transparent mode
			A switch in transparent mode does not fully participate in the VTP domain.
			Transparent switches do not sync their VTP database, do not advertise their VLAN information.
			Transparent switches will only forward VTP ads out its other trunks.
		Off mode
			Disable VTP on the switch, the switch will not forward VTP advertisements.
	VTP Advertisement
		VTP ads are multicasts that are sent out only trunk links.
		These ads carry a configuration revision number to advertise the latest VTP version.
		These ads are sent whenever there is a change in the VTP database.
		Process
			1. SW1 makes a VTP change.
			2. SW1 sends VTP ad with CRN increased by 1 to trunk links.
			3. SW2 receives VTP ad and if the CRN is higer, it increase its CRN accordingly as well as update its VTP database.
		*A switch that in going to be inserted to a new VTP domain have to watched carefully.
			If the switch have a higher CRN numbers, it will mess up the other switches updates.
			The switch have to set the CRN to zero.
			CRN is kept in NVRAM.
			To properly ensure CRN is set to zero,
				1. Change the VTP domain name to a nonexistent domain, then change it back to the original anme.
				2. Change the vtp mode from server to transparent, then back to server.
				<write erase> (Remove all configuration files and initialize switch clean.) does not delete vlan.dat which contains vlans information.
				<delete vlan.dat> and <reload> to fully clean switch.
	VTP Password
		VTP passwords are carried in the VTP ads.
		The password of receiving switch must be the same as the password of the switch that advertised.
			*Switches will not update VTP if password does not match the advertised.
			*However, password does not trigger VTP ads. A force update must be done by making a new VLAN and deleting it.
		Commands
			vtp password (password e.g. CCNA)
			vtp password (password e.g. CCNA) hidden
				Only version 3 VTP switches can have encrypted VTP passwords
			show vtp password
	VTP Versions
		Version 1 is run by default.
		It is recommended to run the same VTP versions on all the switches to avoid any compatibility problems.
		Commands
			vtp version (vtp version e.g. 3)
	VTP Pruning
		Switches can block traffic from unnecessary VLANs (block from source) to reduce bandwidth.
		Commands
			vtp pruning
			int x > switchport trunk pruning vlan (vlan number)
				Control which vlan to prune
	Commands
		vtp domain (domain name e.g. CCNA)
		show vtp status

STP (Spanning Tree Protocol)
	L3 routing protocols allow us to use secondary paths in addition to primary paths, making equal and unequal cost load balancing possible.
	L2 routing protocols allow us to use secondary paths but will not use those paths in addition to primary paths.
	STP blocks ports on valid but less desirable paths. STP unblocks these paths when primary paths become unavailable.
	STP analyze port speeds and determine which ports should be open/closed.
	STP will leave one loop-free path between any two endpoints in the switching network.
	Switching Loops
		Happens on layer 2.
		Causes broadcast storm, frame flooding, wasted bandwidth, etc.
	Routing Loops
		Happens on layer 3.
	Port States
		When STP brings a port of blocking mode, it goes to listening mode first before going to forwarding mode.
		Disabled
			You will not see this in show spanning vlan.
			A disabled port is a port that have been administratively shutdown. It will not forward frames or run STP.
		Blocking
			Blocked port can only accept BPDUs from neighbouring switches.
			It cannot forward frames, receive frames therefore no dynamically learning MAC addresses.
		Listening
			A listening port listens for BPDUs and also sends BPDUs and can participate in root bridge election.
			It cannot forward frames, receive frames therefore no dynamically learning MAC addresses.
		Learning
			A learning port is not forwarding frames but it is learning MAC addresses. It can also send and receive BPDUs.
		Forwarding
			Forwarding port forwards and receive frames, send and receive BPDUs and continue to learn MAC addresses.

		Root Bridge Context
			The root port is the port that is connected to the root bridge.
			All port on the root bridge will be on forwarding mode.
			Root ports on non-root-bridge switches are always on forwarding mode.
			Once the root ports are determined for non-root switches, the link between two non-root switches will have one blocked port and one forwarding port (based on lowest path cost and tiebreakers).
	Process
		BPDUs and Root Bridge Election.
			STP will determine a root bridge (switch) for every VLAN via an election.
			The election process is carried out via the exchange of BPDUs.
			Only root bridge will originate BPDUs. Non-roots will only receive and forward copies of that BPDU.
			The root bridge will also determine the STP timers.
			Each switch has a Bridge ID (BID). The BID is a combination of a 2-byte priority value and the switch's 6-byte MAC address.
			If the priority is left at default for all switch, the MAC address wil determine the root bridge.
			Ensure that root bridge should be the more powerful switches.
			
			Election Process
				Each switch reads the root bridge BID and compares that with its own.
				If the incoming root bridge BID is lower, it knows that that switch is the root.
				It forwards this information to other switches.
				If not, it wil announce itself as the root.
				This will continue until all switches agrees which is the root.
	STP Timer
		Timers must be change on the root. Timers on non-root with only come into effect when it becomes the root.
		Hello Time
			Defines how often the root bridge originates BPDUs. Default setting: 2 seconds
		Forward Delay
			Length of the listening and learning port stages. This helps protect against switching loops. Default setting: 15 seconds
		Maximum Age
			How long a switch retain BPDU before discarding. Default setting: 20 seconds
		Commands
			spanning vlan (vlan number e.g. 1) forward-time (number of seconds)
			spanning vlan (vlan number e.g. 1) hello-time (number of seconds)
			spanning vlan (vlan number e.g. 1) max-age (number of seconds)
	Port Cost/Root Path Cost
		Every STP-enabled port have an assigned port cost which is used to arrive at the switch's root path cost.
		It is a local value that is not advertised.
		The faster the port, the lower the port cost.
		Root Path Cost
			Refers to the overall cost for the switch to reach the root.
			The configuration BPDU carries the root path cost which increments as the BPDU is forwarded throughout the network.
			RPC increases as BPDU reaches switch NOT when it leaves the switch.
		Choosing the root port
			1. Choose the port connected to the path with the lowest root path cost
			2. Choose the port receiving the BPDU with the lowest BID
			3. Choose the port receiving the BPDU from the port with the lowest port priority (NOT cost. It is named "Prio.Nbr"). Check this using <show spanning vlan x detail>
			4. Choose the port with the lowest port ID. (Named "Prio.Nbr" e.g. 128.13 vs 128.14)
		Port Speed/Cost
			10 Gbps		2
			1 Gbps		4
			100 Mbps	19
			10 Mbps		100
		Commands
			spanning cost (path cost)
				Change path cost of an interface
	Load Balancing
		Commands
			interface > spanning vlan (vlan number) cost (path cost)
				Change vlan path cost. (Used to enable load balancing)
			show spanning vlan x
				You can check the path cost of x vlan using this.
	Manual Root Switch Selection
		A secondary root can be configured to take over if the primary root goes down.
		If priority of root is greater than 24576, the priority of the new root will be 24756
		Else, the new root priority will be root priority - 4096
		Commands
			spanning vlan (vlan number) root primary/secondary
				Set current switch to be primary/secondary root of a vlan
			spanning vlan (vlan number) priority (priority number)
				Set the current switch priority.
				Must enter the priority in increments of 4096
	Portfast
		Allows a port running STP to go directly from blocking to forwarding mode.
		If you have a host that have trouble getting IP address via DHCP, portfast may be able to fix the problem.
		STP learning and listening stages can interfere with host's DHCP address acquisition process.
		Commands
			interface > spanning-tree portfast ?trunk
			spanning-tree portfast default
				Enable portfast by default on all access ports
			show spanning (interface) portfast
	Root Guard
		If there is a designated root switch and you do not want any other switches to become root, Root Guard can be used.
		Root guard blocks superior BPDUs from certain ports to prevent root bridge election.
		Commands
			interface > spanning guard root
			show spanning incon
	BPDU Guard
		Blocks all BPDU from a BPDU enabled port.
		Puts port receiving BPDU into err-disabled state.
		Commands
			interface > spanning bpduguard enable
			spanning portfast bpduguard default
				Enable bpduguard to protect portfast ports from triggering switching loops
	Commands
		show spanning vlan x
		show spanning-tree vlan x
		show spanning vlan x root
		show spanning vlan x detail

Etherchannels
	Etherchannels are logical bundling of 2-8 parallel trunk ports running between two switches.
	Allows to use more of the available bandwidth and avoid timer delays.
	*Ports placed inside an EC should be running at the same speed and have the same duplex settings.
	If root port goes down, secondary port takes some time to get up. Etherchannel helps with this delay.
	Cost of EC will change if ports in the channel goes down but the availability will not.
	Commands
		int range > channel-group (channel number) mode on
			Create a port channel for EC.
		show int trunk
		show spanning vlan x
			Check for port numbers grouping into channels
		show etherchannel (group number) summary
		show etherchannel (group number) port-channel
		show etherchannel (group number) detail
	Negotiation Protocols
		Industry standard uses LACP while Cisco uses PAgP
		LACP
			Allows for assigning up to 16 ports in EC.
			This allows for secondary ports (8 ports, based on port priority) to come up when primary ports fail.
			Port modes
				Active
					Will initiate bundling
				Passive
					Will wait for other end to initiate bundling.
					*If both ports is set to passive, bundling will not join.
		PAgP
			Dynamically changes port speed and duplex, etc when one port is changed.
			Port modes
				Desirable
					Initiate bundling with a remote port
				Auto
					Waits port on other end of trunk to initiate bundling
					*If both ports is set to auto, bundling will not join.
		Commands
			channel-group (group number) mode active/passive/desirable/auto
			show int port-channel (group number)
Rapid Spanning-Tree Protocol
	Comparison
		Normally in STP, ports between non root switches have one single designated port with the others being blocked ports.
		In RSTP, blocked ports are used as alternate paths to the root switch instead.
		
		STP ports state "disabled", "blocking" and "listening" are combined into the RSTP state discarding, the initial RSTP port state.
		RSTP ports transition from discarding to learning, where incoming frames are discarded but the MAC addresses are being learned by the switch.
		RSTP ports then transition from learning to forwarding state.
		
		STP: disabled > blocking > listening > learning > forwarding
		RSTP: discarding > learning > forwarding

		STP root bridge generates and transmits BPDUs every 2s and the non-root bridges read and relay the BPDUs.
		RSTP-enabled switches generate a BPDU every 2s regardless of whether they received a BPDU from the root
		Every switch expects to see a BPDU from its neighbor every 2s and if 3 BPDUs are missed, the links are considered to be down.
		This behaviour allows for switches to check for link failures faster.
		The switch then ages all information concerning the port which cuts down the default STP timer from 20s to 6s in RSTP.
	Port Types
		RSTP have two unique port types, "edge ports" and "point to point ports"
			P2P ports
				A p2p port is any port running in full-duplex mode.
				Any port running half duplex are considered shared ports and must run STP rather than RSTP.
			Edge ports
				Only a single host will connected to an edge port.
				When edge ports move into forwarding mode, RSTP does not consider than a change in the network and does not send out any notification.
				When non edge ports move into forwarding mode, a TCN (Topology Change Notification) BPDU is sent by RSTP to all non-edge ports designated ports.
	Commands
		spanning mode rapid-pvst
			Configure to use RSTP.
		show spanning summary
			Check for "switch is in rapid-pvst mode"

OSPF
	Link state protocol vs a distance vector protocol like RIP.
	The drawback of a distance vector protocol is the regular routing updates. The updates also sends the full routing table which takes up bandwidth.
	Distance vector protocols also have slow convergence compared to OSPF. Slow convergence can lead to routing loops.
	EIGRP send full updates only when adjacency is built and only sends routing updates.
	*Link state protocols exchange Link State Updates (LSUs) that contains Link State Advertisements (LSAs) when they form adjacencies.
	These LSAs are placed into a link state database.
	Once the OSPF network have reached convergence, they use a synchronized link state database.
	OSPF use Dijkstra to create a routing table using the contents of the database.
		Dijkstra is extremely fast and doesn't allow routing loops to form.
	Link State Advertisements (LSAs)
		LSAs are assigned sequence numbers for routers to check for the most recent information.
		When a router receives and LSA, it checks the OSPF database for any pre-existing entries.
		If there are none, it creates one in the database and floods the LSA out every OSPF-enabled interface except the interface the LSA came in on. (Similar to Split Horizon)
		If there are entries, it checks for sequence number.
		If the sequence number is the same, the LSA is ignored.
		If the sequence number is lower, the router ignores the update and sends a LSU back to the original sender to update the routing table.
		If the sequence number is higher, the router adds  the LSA to its database and sends an ACK back to original sender. It also floods the LSA and update its own routing table by running Dijkstra against the updated database.
		Once the initial LSAs exchange takes place, there will not be another exchange until the network topology changes.
		An OSPF router will send out a summary LSA every 30 minutes.
	Adjacency
		OSPF routers must become neighbors by forming adjacencies.
		Routers must agree on area number, hello and dead timer settings and whether the area is a stub area.
		Dead timer, hello timer and network mask must match to allow for neighbors to form.
		If link authentication is configured, it must be set up both sides of the adjacency.
		Adjacency states
			Down: No hellos received yet from neighbor
			Attempt: Unicast hello packets are being sent to the neighbor. (Only on hub router in NBMA network (OSPF serial connections over a cloud))
			Init: Router multicasts a hello packet to 224.0.0.5
			2-Way: Router that received hello in Init stage now unicast (to source address) a hello back indicating willingness to become neighbors.
			Exstart: Once the Designated Router DR/ Backup Designated Router BDR election occurs, start exchanging link state database info. Router with highest (OSPF Router ID) RID will begin exchange and increment initial sequence number.
			Exchange: Database Descriptor (DBD) packets are exchanged which contain a description of the link state database.
			Loading: Router now sent LSR packets to the almost-neighbor
			Full: Router databases are synced and adjacency is formed.
	Hello Packet
		OSPF relies on hello packets for 1. Dynamic discovery of potential neighbors. 2. Renewing existing adjacencies.
		Sent on regularly scheduled intervals. 10s on Ethernet-based segments and 30s on Serial links.
		OSPF Hellos have a destination IP of 224.0.0.5.
	Timers
		Hello timer checks for neighbors
		Dead timer is the interval during which at least one hello packet must be received from a neighbor before the router declares that neighbor as down
		Commands
			ip ospf hello-interval (seconds)
	DR/BDR
		When a OSPF router detects a change in the network, the router sends a multicast to 224.0.0.6 (all designated router addr) where the DR and BDR will hear it.
		The DR then sends a multicast to 224.0.0.5 (all OSPF router addr). The BDR updates its OSPF database and standby to step into DR role but only DR sends the multicast.
		If you do not want BDRs to form, you can set the router OSPF priority to 0
		?In a broadcast segment, one router will become the DR, another the BDR and the others routers?.
		Election Process
			All routers interfaces with an OSPF interface priority of 1 and higher are eligible to participate in the election. The router with the highest interface priority is the elected DR.
			If both priority is the same, the tiebreaker will be the RID.
			A single router cannot be both the DR and BDR.
	RID
		The RID of a router will be the highest IP address assigned to a loopback interface, regardless of whether the loopback is OSPF-enabled.
		If there is no loopback, the RID will be the highest IP address assigned to a physical interface.
		Also known as the neighbor ID.
		Commands
			router-id (RID) >> clear ip ospf process
				Create a manual RID
	Area
		Every network segment added to OSPF must be placed into an area via the network command.
		The network comand won't be accepted by the router unless you specify the area for that segment.
		Area 0 is the backbone area of an OSPF deployment and every non-backbone area in the network must have an interface on a router that has a physical or logical connection to Area 0.
		[Areas are basically smaller network segments. The smaller the network segment, the less it have to talk to other routers when something changes, resulting in less bandwidth usage.]
	Commands
		router ospf (process id e.g. 1) >> network (network ip e.g. 10.1.1.0) (wildcard e.g. if network needs to be in 10.1.1, wild card is 0.0.0.255) area (area id e.g. 0)
			Enable OSPF on interface
			The number specified with router ospf is the OSPF process number.
			Multiple OSPF processes can be run on a single router.
		neighbor (neighbor ip address)
			NBMA networks require router to have IP address of each of their neighbors. Configure on hub in a hub and spoke network.
		show ip ospf database
		show ip ospf neighbor
		show ip ospf int
		show ip route ospf
		debug ip ospf adj
		debug ip ospf hello
			R = received
			C = configured

OSPF (Explained)
	Is a:
		Interior gateway protocol i.e. designed to be used a single autonomous system
		Link state routing protocol.
	Routers learn every router and subnet in a network.
	Routers send LSAs that contain subnet, router, etc information.
	Once routers LSAs have been flooded, routers save these information in their Link State Databases.

	DR/BDR
		In the same network segment, routers will only become full-neighbors with DR/BDRs
			This means that they will only receive the full routing updates with DR/BDRs.
			The other neighbors will be in the 2 way stage which ignores updates.
		If a router in a network goes down, it lets the other routers know that it is down. The routers then tell each other that that router is down.
			This could lead to a messy situation.
			DR/BDR are there to tell routing updates to other routers.
		DR/BDR is elected based highest OSPF priority. Tiebreakers: Highest RID

	Steps
		Become neighbors
			Two routers running OSPF on the same link agree to form a neighbor relationship
		Exchange database information
			The neighbor routers swap their LSDB information with each other
		Choose the best routes
			Router choose the best routes to add to its routing table using Dijkstra on its database.
	In-depth
		Each router have a Router ID (RID) in the format of a IPv4 address.
			RID can be set by (in order): Manually assigning / Highest loopback IP / Highest non loopback IP
			Down stage
				Router 1 will reach out to others with a hello message.
				Hello message contains router's RID as well as known neighbors.
					It is used to check whether routers are still up.
				Router 2 receives message and check for requirements i.e. Timers, area ID, subnet, authentication config, sub area flag, unique RID
			Init stage
				Router 2 replies with a hello message that contains its RID as well as the Router 1's RID.
				Router 1 reads its own RID and moves to the 2 way stage.
			2 way stage
				Router 1 sends a hello message with Router 2 RID.
				Router 2 then enters 2 way stage.
			Exstart stage
				Router selects slave and master based on RID
				Master controls sequence numbers and start exchange process.
			Exchange stage
				Router sends each other full LSAs (Database Description DBDs)
				Each router checks the DBD and request information that they don't have (Link State Request)
				Router sends Link State Update containing relevant information
				Router then sends LSAck to complete the transaction.
			Choose best route
				Router checks best route by doing a cost calculation
					Cost calculation is based on reference bandwidth divided by interface bandwidth
						Default ref bandwidth: 100000Kbps
					Serial
						1544 Kbps > 64 Cost
					Ethernet
						10000 Kbps > 10 Cost
					FastEthernet
						100000 Kbps > 1 Cost
OSPF Multi Area (Explained)
	OSPF Multi areas segments a big OSPF network to smaller parts, reducing size of routing tables, link state databases and contain update messages.
	Recommended to have 50 routers max per area.
	OSPF areas require a unique network subnet to themselves.
	Area 0 or backbone area, is an area which all areas need to be joined up to.
	Interfaces that connect area 0 to the other areas are called Area Border Routers (Routers that are in 2 areas).
		These border routers forward packets to their respective area networks.
		These routers send a network subnet summary to area 0.
		These routers also send area 0 network subnet summary to their respective area networks.
	Routers in non-0 areas are called internal routers.
	Routers that connect to a non-OSPF routing protocol network are called Autonomous System Boundary Router
		i.e. Routers that connect to public internet

EIGRP
	Hybrid protocol, have characteristics of link state and distance vector protocol.
	EIGRP intially exchanges full routing tables
	Thereafter an EIGRP router will send an update (only the changes) only when there is a change in the network.
	Rapid convergence as backup routes are calculated before they are needed and can take the role of a primary route immediately.
	Compatibility
		Multiprotocol support
		IP, IPX, AppleTalk
		VLSM/CIDR support
	Considers bandwidth and delay when calculating routes instead of RIP's hop count.
	EIGRP have to form adjacencies and uses hello packets (multicast to 224.0.0.10) to establish and maintain neighbor relationships.
		Reliable Transport Protocol is used to handle the transport of messages between EIGRP routers.
	EIGRP have autonomous systems (similar to areas in OSPF) identify routers that belong to the same logical group.
		EIGRP speakers that are in separate AS cannot become neighbors.
	Adjacency
		Both routers must have same:
			Authentication config
			Subnet
			K-values
		Hello timers and dead timers do not need to match.
		Once the adjacency is formed, it is kept alive by hello packets and if hello packets stop coming, adjacency is dropped.